Understanding Gender Terms
A person's gender is one of the most basic parts of their identity. It is more than the sex assigned to them at birth. Gender is how a person feels and expresses themselves. It can influence, and be influenced, by many things. It can change over time.

Defining Basic Gender Terms

The following terms and definitions are commonly used to differentiate between various aspects of gender identity:

Sex - The classification of people as male or female, typically assigned at birth based on the appearance of external anatomy.
Gender - The socially constructed roles and behaviors that a society typically associates with males and females.
Gender identity - A person's internal sense of self, which can be male, female, both, neither or something else.
Gender expression - How a person presents their gender to others through clothing, hairstyle, voice and mannerisms.
Cisgender - When a person's assigned sex at birth corresponds with their gender identity and expression.
Gender nonconforming - When a person's gender expression does not correspond with the appearance or behaviors of a stereotypical male or female. Not all gender non-conforming people identity as transgender, and not all transgender people are gender non-conforming.
Agender - When a person doesn't have a specific gender identity.
Bigender - When a person has two gender identities.
Genderqueer - When a person identifies with both genders, no gender or a combination of the stereotypical male and female characteristics.
Transgender - An umbrella term describing when a person's gender identity is different than what society expects based on the person's sex assigned at birth.
Transgender woman - A person who was assigned male at birth, but identifies and expresses their gender as female. Sometimes shortened to trans woman.
Transgender man - A person who was assigned female at birth, but identifies and expresses their gender as male. Sometimes shortened to trans man.
Gender-expansive - When a person's identity or behavior is broader than the commonly held definitions of gender and gender expression in one or more aspects of their life. They may not identify with being either male or female, or may identify as a combination of both or they might express their gender in a different way.
Gender-fluid - When a person has a flexible gender identity and expression that can fluctuate by the hour, day, or longer interval of time.
Gender dysphoria - An emotional and psychological condition experienced when a person's gender identity differs from the sex they were assigned at birth.
Gender confirmation surgery or sex reassignment surgery - A treatment for gender dysphoria which changes the physical appearance and function of a person's genitals to bring them into alignment with their gender identity.
Intersex - A general term covering a variety of conditions in which a person's sex characteristics - including chromosomes, gonads or genitals - are not distinct to either a male or female.
Communication about gender can be clearer if the various terms are understood and correctly used.
Writers who use unbiased language write in ways that are free from gender and group stereotypes including race, age, ethnicity, disability or sexual orientation. By using unbiased language, writers can avoid using offensive language. This type of writing is appropriate for many different writing situations, especially in formal writing such as academic and journalistic. Writers must recognize where they are most likely to encounter problems of biased language in their writing.

Creating Unbiased Language
Gender Specific Pronouns and Sexist Terminology
English speakers use gender specific pronouns to explain the gender of the person in question, as compared to other languages that use suffixes. The singular gender pronouns, he, she, him or her, are used in speaking and writing. In the past, the male pronouns were used to denote both male and female if the sentence used a singular construction.

Here is an example: "Everyone must do his part."

The subject of the sentence is the singular, indefinite pronoun "everyone." This means that any accompanying pronouns that refer back to "everyone" must be singular as well. In the past, the singular pronoun "his" would suffice.

This type of singular gendered construction is no longer acceptable because it infringes on another issue of biased language called sexist terminology. Writers hesitate to use the masculine or the feminine versions of the pronoun.

Instead, many writers will use the gender neutral pronouns such as they or their. This presents a grammar problem because the singular noun "everyone" paired with a plural pronoun is grammatically incorrect. Sadly, this construction of the singular noun with a plural gender neutral pronoun is widely used in speech and has filtered into writing as well.

Writers have two alternatives to fixing this problem.

The first is to use a the "he or she" or "him or her" construction. However, this could become very unwieldy very quickly. The constant use of he or she or him or her throughout a paragraph will get confusing to read, write or speak. Some writers like to use the term "s/he." Again though, writers must consider how this construction sounds. How does someone pronounce "s/he"? These pronouns can be used but the next alternative is preferred.
The second choice writers have is to use a plural noun with the plural non-gendered pronoun. This allows writers easy use of unbiased language compared to the first choice. In the first example, "everyone must do his part," can easily be changed to, "people must do their part." This avoids sexist language and a pronoun error.
Sexist language is not confined to pronouns though. Another way to avoid gender roles and assumptions and used unbiased language is to use gender neutral endings on certain nouns. Job titles seem to carry a masculine construction that is now considered sexists and offensive.

The following list will give the example sexist language and how it can be changed to unbiased language:

Chairman could be chair person
Congressman could be member of congress
Postman or mailman could be postal worker
Using unbiased language also means not assuming gender bias in roles that used to be predominantly male. For example, many people might assume that doctors or engineers are male because these occupations have traditionally been male dominated. Similarly nurses or teachers are not all women.

Groups of People
When referring to groups of people in writing, writers must avoid using insulting terminology when referring to ethnicity, sexual preference, and disabilities.

For ethnicity, writers must know what terms are appropriate and what terms are insulting. For instance, Asian is appropriate but Oriental would be considered insulting.
For sexual preference, terms have been created to be specific and denote important distinctions rather than grouping people together. However, knowing which terms are in currently in favor compared with those that have gone out of favor will require the writer to do some research.
For disabilities, people should not be identified by their disability. Writers should note that a person has a disability rather than saying the person is the disability. For example, the sentence "Ray has a mental disability" says that the disability is a part of Ray is different than saying "Ray is mentally disabled" which says that the disability is Ray.
Challenge of Unbiased Language
Writing using unbiased language can be challenging because it requires an understanding of what constitutes biased language in the first place. Understanding how to use gender neutral language in a grammatically correct way, non sexist terminology, and non offensive terms for identifying groups of people will be a good place to begin.
Antonyms, synonyms, and homonyms are three sources of concern in classrooms. They can be confusing, so it's good to get a hang of them early. These words can add a lot of variety to speech and writing. Once you understand how each is used, you will be able to overcome many challenges in spelling and vocabulary.

Interrelationship of Words
When you're learning words, there can't help but be spots where things get a little murky. English vocabulary is especially full of pitfalls since the language is so vast. In English, there are several words that share one meaning or nuances of one meaning. Then there are tiny words like "set" and "get" that have so many meanings that their definitions take up multiple dictionary pages. Then, just to make it more daunting, the English language has over a million words. As far as word banks go, English is massive.
But don't let the enormousness of the language turn you off. Homonyms, antonyms, and synonyms can be used to learn new words and add a great deal to your diction and the way you talk about language in particular.

Knowing which words are similar or opposites helps people understand the same when it comes to ideas. Ideas are impossible without words, and words are impossible without ideas. The more you think about the interrelationship of one, the better you are able to think about the interrelationship of the other.

Antonyms
Antonyms are words that mean the opposite of other words. They are used to show a contrast between two things. The antonym of "big" is "small," for example. Some other examples of antonyms are full / empty, fail / succeed, and liquid / solid.
The English language also lets its speakers make antonyms just by adding a prefix. The following are examples of how prefixes can be affixed to some words to create antonyms.

Un: Official becomes unofficial. Dress becomes undress.
In: Flexible becomes inflexible. Complete becomes incomplete.
Im: Possible becomes impossible. Polite becomes impolite.
Ir: Rational becomes irrational. Regular becomes irregular.
Dis: Honest becomes dishonest. Advantage becomes disadvantage.
Il: Logical becomes illogical. Legal becomes illegal.
Mis: Fortune becomes misfortune. Behave becomes misbehave.
Keep in mind that adding a prefix does not always make the word an antonym. For example, flammable and inflammable are not opposites. They mean the same thing and are synonyms. There are always exceptions to the rules in the English language and some things just have to be learned through usage.

Synonyms
Synonyms are words that share meanings with other words. They are used to add variety to writing and speech and allow you to avoid repetition. The words amazing, astounding, and marvelous are all synonyms. Their meanings are similar and can be interchanged with one another. Another set of synonyms are big, large, and huge.

There are many reasons why synonyms are great. Here are three:

They make it possible for writers to create a certain mood with their subtle differences. "Walk" sets a different pace than "saunter," and "drink" implies a different style than "guzzle." The differences are implied by the word selected, and when a writer is trying to paint a picture in a reader's mind, those differences can make or break a writer's prose.
They give writers more rhythmic tools. "Absquatulate" means the same as "abscond," but they are rhythmically very different. Every serious writer thinks about the rhythm of what he or she produces. Synonyms give writers more control over that rhythm.
They sound fancy. Sometimes knowing a better-sounding word makes you sound intelligent, like choosing "utilize" instead of "use," but remember that a little of this goes a long way. If you don't want to use fancy synonyms, you should at least be able to know when someone else is. People may use argot that isn't immediately understandable, but if you know a lot of synonyms, you should never be lost. Plus, if someone fails to comprehend your own jargon, you can use a synonym they know to get your point across.
Once you have an arsenal of synonyms at your disposal, you can work on the tone of your writing and see how it is changed by saying, for example, "discharging a firearm" instead of "firing a gun," or "disenfranchised youths" for "kids without voices."

Homonyms
Homonyms are words that have the same spelling and pronunciation but different meanings. Because these words sound and look the same but mean something different they can be the source of entertainment, confusion, or even inspiration.

Some common homonyms:

Address can be a property location or it can be a manner of speaking to a group of people.
Bat can be an implement used to hit a ball or it can be a nocturnal flying mammal.
Bear can be an animal or it can mean to tolerate something or someone
Fire can mean a blaze or it can mean to terminate someone from a job.
Trip can mean to stumble or fall or it can mean to go on a vacation.
Watch can be a wearable timepiece or it can mean to look at something closely.
Expand Your Vocabulary
Learning antonyms, synonyms and homonyms can be tricky but having a few in your language belt will certainly help expand your vocabulary. Using a variety of these words will make your speech and writing more vivid and exciting, and can help you avoid being repetitive or stale.
